URL: http://akasa.com/authadvisor/

AKASA Authorization Advisor | AKASA
introducing Authorization Advisor, powered by generative AI Empower auth specialists to fill in patient information more rapidly and attach relevant clinical documents more accurately on payer portals, helping them complete a higher volume per day with less effort.
GenAI superpowers at prior auth staff fingertipsPrior authorizations are the second most time-consuming task in the revenue cycle, according to healthcare finance leaders. Fix that with Authorization AdvisorTM from AKASA.
Authorization Advisor is a generative AI (GenAI)-powered assistant that helps prior auth specialists efficiently submit auth requests on payer portals. The interactive browser sidebar lives in your workflow and enables staff to fill in patient information and authorization details quickly. It reviews relevant medical information and recommends documents to include in the auth request.
Plus, Authorization Advisor works with any payer portal or service line and most EHRs (including Epic and Cerner). Our AI continuously learns from customer inputs and improves future recommendations.
Authorization Advisor means:
Faster auth submissions
More complete prior auth submissions
Reduced authorization delays
Less physician time needed for peer-to-peer reviews
Improved staff productivity
Timely patient care
Talk with our RCM experts
"*" indicates required fields
First Name* Last Name* Work Email*
Company* Job Title* Phone*CommentsHiddenSF Campaign ID For Admin use only.
See Authorization Advisor in action
How Authorization Advisor works
Efficiently extracts key info from your EHR and presents it in an interactive browser sidebar
Intelligently suggests relevant clinical documentation using powerful GenAI
Seamlessly supports any payer portal or service line, and most EHRs
Deciding between faster or better work? Why not both?
50%
Saves as much as 50% of time spent per auth, up to 10 minutes
15%
Empowers staff to find 15% more relevant docs than staff alone in auth requests
3 Ways the AKASA Authorization Advisor Can Help Your RCM Team
READ BLOG
I’ve been using Authorization Advisor to submit auths and it’s spectacular. It does the heavy lifting of reviewing and presenting the documents I need to complete the auth. Plus, it brings patient information right to the payer portal, right into my workflow. No more jumping back and forth between the EHR and portal or worrying about screens freezing and losing all my work. Authorization Advisor has saved me so much time. I wish this tool existed years ago.
Authorization Advisor user
Learn more about Authorization Advisor
"*" indicates required fields
First Name* Last Name* Work Email*
Company* Job Title* Phone*CommentsHiddenSF Campaign ID For Admin use only.
Product images and videos featured are for illustrative purposes only and do not depict actual screenshots from the product.