URL: https://akasa.com/blog/10-questions-for-military-spouses-at-akasa/#7

10 Questions for Military Spouses at AKASA | AKASA
Blog
10 Questions for Military Spouses at AKASA
AKASA July 27, 2022
The Gist
Military Appreciation Month and Military Spouse Appreciation day both happen in May, during which time we celebrate and honor the millions of active and veteran servicepeople and their spouses. There are numerous military spouses at AKASA, each of which makes our work possible. To honor the military spouses of AKASA, we invited them to share their stories, struggles, and tips around life as a military spouse.
Blog Contents
Amber Taylor
RCO Analyst II
Tayler Prater
RCO Analyst II
Shannon Wild
Manager of RCO Projects
Sasha Garcia
RCO Analyst II
Katie Eden
Revenue Cycle Operations Supervisor
Niki Bouge
RCO Analyst II
Loreina Moreno
Data Analyst I
Monica Wilson
RCO Analyst III
Bailee Chokr
RCO Analyst I
Amy Raymond
VP of Revenue Cycle Operations
There are more than seven million military spouses in the United States, between active duty and surviving spouses of veterans. May is Military Appreciation Month, with Military Spouse Appreciation day falling on May 6, a time during which we honor and celebrate those partnering with active and veteran military service members.
At AKASA, we have a number of military spouses that proudly help our clients and support our team. Our very own VP of revenue cycle operations, Amy Raymond, is a proud military spouse who’s made it her mission to hire and support as many other military spouses as possible.
Raymond lost a job she loved largely because of her status as a military spouse. She couldn’t travel, and her husband was deployed, so her career was put on hold. After receiving support from a commanding officer’s wife and local groups, Raymond realized a career was possible, and that support made all the difference in the world.
From the moment she joined AKASA, Raymond set out to hire as many qualified military spouse revenue cycle specialists as possible.
Support made a huge difference for me, and I wanted to return the favor and help as many military spouses as possible.
~ Amy Raymond, VP of Revenue Cycle Operations at AKASA
We have a rapidly growing group of military spouses at AKASA, largely thanks to Raymond’s efforts. We know and appreciate these wonderful individuals, and want to give you the same opportunity to meet them. Here are some of the military spouses that help make AKASA’s healthcare operations work possible.
1. Amber Taylor
Title: RCO Analyst II
Spouse Military Branch: US Navy
What was most unexpected for you about being a military spouse?
I never realized how capable I am of doing hard things. I’ve learned so much about my ability to step up, to be adaptable, to try new things. As a military spouse, the responsibilities surrounding kids’ illnesses, appointments, extracurriculars, etc. all fall on me.
It’s been hard, but so rewarding.
2. Tayler Prater
Title: RCO Analyst II
Spouse Military Branch: US Navy
Have you encountered problems around finding work when you transfer to different states?
For me, work has always been the biggest struggle anytime we move — from finding places that are hiring to getting hired to needing time off to putting in your two weeks a few years later when it’s time to move again. And then you have to start the whole process over. My resume is so long! So many military spouses have trouble advancing in their careers, as a result.
3. Shannon Wild
Title: Manager of RCO Projects
Spouse Military Branch: Air Force (Shannon and her husband both served)
What can businesses do to better support military spouses and families?
Understanding is huge! When a spouse is gone, the burden of maintaining the home and the family falls 100% on the spouse left behind. Things like taking the kids to school, handling doctors appointments, and grocery shopping become harder to coordinate.
When employers are willing to work with employees on start times, it can make a huge difference in the stress the spouse is dealing with. Oftentimes, kids are really emotional when a spouse deploys, especially if they’re old enough to understand where they’re going. Being able to be there to drop off and pick up a child from school helps the child feel comforted.
Also, understanding that there is a time difference and the spouse might call in the middle of the day. If the employee feels comfortable to step away and take the call, that’s huge as well.
Understanding the employee’s needs have changed and helping them navigate through that is helpful overall.
4. Sasha Garcia
Title: RCO Analyst II
Spouse Military Branch: Army
How can people better understand life as a military spouse?
In a weird sense, the military spouse is serving as well. But in a different respect. When our husband or wife takes that oath, we’re also serving. Serving by having to be okay with being away from our spouse for long periods of time. Serving by going days and weeks without any communication to confirm they’re okay, all while maintaining a home, raising children, and explaining that Mommy or Daddy will be home soon (while holding back your own tears). There are so many different battles that military spouses deal with that are not always brought to light.
5. Katie Eden
Title: Revenue Cycle Operations Supervisor
Spouse Military Branch: Navy
What’s one benefit every company should offer military spouses?
It can be difficult for a military spouse to have a career due to the demands of the military. A couple of benefits here at AKASA that support military spouses include working remotely and flex time. That flexibility is key for military families.
Also, the unforeseen ups and downs of the military can add stress to military families. A self-care benefit that promotes well-being would be valuable.
6. Niki Bouge
Title: RCO Analyst II
Spouse Military Branch: Navy
What can colleagues do to support military spouses?
Colleagues simply need to be understanding of our ever-changing lives. It helps just to know we have our colleagues on our side if we ever need words of encouragement or even someone to vent to.
7. Loreina Moreno
Title: Data Analyst I
Spouse Military Branch: Navy
What are some of the challenges of being a working military spouse that most people may not realize?
Up until joining AKASA, I could never see myself being able to hold a job that could survive our next duty transfer. Finding work that fits around our spouse and children is a pretty tough task! When I became an employee at AKASA, I had this moment where I realized I never had to be worried about starting and stopping random jobs again.
8. Monica Wilson
Title: RCO Analyst III
Spouse Military Branch: Army
What’s your fondest memory as a military spouse?
A few of my husband’s best friends, who he served with, attended our wedding. They reminisced and shared stories throughout the entire night. Many of these stories were new to me, reminding me how proud I am of what my husband did for our country.
9. Bailee Chokr
Title: RCO Analyst I
Spouse Military Branch: Coast Guard
How has AKASA supported you as a military spouse?
More PTO has allowed me to FINALLY enjoy a vacation with my husband. In the past, PTO was saved for trips to Michigan to see family or used for moving. With more flexible PTO, I can use time for those essential family trips and moving, but also take precious time off with my husband.
10. Amy Raymond
Title: VP of Revenue Cycle Operations
Spouse Military Branch: Navy
What would you say to those struggling to find their footing as a military spouse?
Don’t give up.
Network as much as you can. Take advantage of milspouse communities, companies like Hiring Our Heroes, the Morale, Welfare, and Recreation (MWR) program, free education available to spouses, career fairs, free LinkedIn pro subscriptions for trainings and connecting, and so on.
Remind yourself that it’s okay to reevaluate your “why” and decide what you want to do, whether that’s work or stay home or something else entirely. Either way, don’t give up.
Appreciating Military Spouses Everywhere
The above people are only a handful of the millions of military spouses in the United States. Just as we appreciate them, we appreciate each and every military spouse. Without their dedication, sacrifice, and support, the people that serve the United States wouldn’t be able to do what they do.
While military spouses often serve as the foundation of their family, we also recognize that nobody can or should go it alone. If you or someone you know is a military spouse in need of support, these organizations are here to help:
Hire Heroes USA: employment support for military and military spouses
Army MWR: resources and recreation programs for military families
The Military Spouse Employment Partnership: job portal geared toward military spouses
CDC Directory of Mental Health Resources: free resources for mental wellness/support
We also understand the work-related struggles that often come with being a military spouse. AKASA is always hiring, so we encourage all military spouses to check our career pages. We offer fully-remote work, extensive benefits, unlimited PTO, and the understanding that military spouses face a number of challenges unique to military life.
While May is the official month for appreciating the military and military spouses, we at AKASA appreciate all that you do, year-round. Thank you.
You may also like
Blog
Nov 29, 2022 A Facial Focus on Health: My Movember Experience and Commitment to Making a Difference in Men’s Health
Nearly 20 years ago, two gentlemen and a small group of their friends in Australia decided to bring awareness...
READ MORE
Blog
Nov 13, 2023 Becker’s Hospital Review Podcast: An Interview with AKASA Co-Founders
On a recent episode of the Becker’s Hospital Review Podcast, Scott Becker sat down with AKASA co-founders, Malinka Walaliyadde...
READ MORE
Blog
Aug 9, 2024 Senior Software Engineer Armaghan Behlum on Why He Joined AKASA
It’s been nearly two years since I left Verily, an Alphabet company focused on using advanced technology to improve...
READ MORE
Blog
Jun 17, 2022 9 Trends from HIMSS 2022
A World Unto Itself It’s difficult to communicate the sheer magnitude of the 2022 HIMSS Global Health Conference &...
READ MORE
Blog
Jul 27, 2022 10 Questions for Military Spouses at AKASA
There are more than seven million military spouses in the United States, between active duty and surviving spouses of...
READ MORE
Blog
Jul 10, 2024 10 Questions for Amy Raymond, Head of Revenue Cycle Operations at AKASA
As a part of our People of AKASA series, we’re interviewing the folks behind the brand. From engineering to...
READ MORE
Blog
Dec 5, 2024 Using Machine Learning to Enable Autonomous Medical Coding
It’s no secret that the healthcare industry is complex. Medical coding, the act of transcribing each medical condition into...
READ MORE
Blog
Jul 25, 2022 10 Questions for Sanjay Siddhanti, Director of Engineering at AKASA
As a part of our People of AKASA series, we’re interviewing the folks behind the brand. From engineering to...
READ MORE
Find out how AKASA's GenAI-driven revenue cycle solutions can help you.
Let's chatCONTACT US