URL: https://www.akasa.com/coding-optimizer/

AKASA Coding Optimizer | AKASA
AKASA Coding Optimizer
What others miss, we findAKASA Coding OptimizerTM uses the latest generative AI (GenAI) technology to review coded inpatient encounters and relevant documentation, uncovering missed revenue opportunities and quality measures.
Every service line. Every code. Every dollar.
DISCOVER YOUR REVENUE POTENTIAL
Proven results
For a $1B NPR regional health system, AKASA delivered:
0.164
overall CMI gain system-wide
$3M
in potential annual revenue impact
8x
more coding opportunities compared to other solutions
I think it will be helpful for all coders. This will catch things we may have missed in our hurry to get encounters out the door quickly.
Coding Optimizer user
It's easy to use.
Coding Optimizer user
Coding Optimizer is definitely helpful in catching missed or incorrectly coded diagnoses and procedures. It’s easy to navigate and user-friendly.
Coding Optimizer user
The detail on code suggestions is really helpful. It will be especially helpful for new coders since we don’t have time to audit their work and do education.
Coding Optimizer user
Meet Coding Optimizer
Dashboard displays identified opportunities, allowing you to prioritize by DRG impact, quality indicators, AI confidence level, and more.
Our layout makes it easy to validate suggestions, view supporting documentation, and approve codes.
Quickly review missed code opportunities with justifications, exact quotes, and direct links to supporting documentation.
Embedded coding guidelines, codebooks, and clinics streamline validation and ensure accuracy when reviewing AI suggestions.
Why you need GenAI and Coding Optimizer
Tailored to your health system’s unique needs
Trained on your clinical and financial data
Designed to learn your nuances
Built to review 100% of service lines and encounters
Optimized to deliver highly accurate and actionable coding suggestions
Focused on quality measures and visit complexity and severity to achieve your appropriate revenue and case mix index (CMI)
Want your full reimbursement?
get it now
How Coding Optimizer works
REVIEWS
GenAI reviews encounters and relevant clinical documents across all service lines
ANALYZES
GenAI analyzes the encounters for missed coding opportunities and potential financial impact
PRESENTS
GenAI presents high-confidence coding suggestions to the health system coding team via an intuitive interface
VALIDATES
Coders validate the AI’s suggestions, with justifications and easily verifiable direct quotes
APPROVES
Coders approve the codes with confidence
Why coding teams choose Coding Optimizer
Knows your health system
Finds what others miss
Captures key quality indicators and CMI
Offers full transparency
Provides results in hours — instead of days
Allows for fast coding reviews — done in minutes
We build a GenAI model just for your health system and train it on your clinical and financial data. It learns your unique nuances to deliver highly accurate recommendations.
Our GenAI uncovers hard-to-spot coding opportunities pre-bill and post-bill, overlooked by legacy technology and manual reviews. We identify missed diagnoses and procedure codes with quality and DRG impacts, ensuring nothing slips through the cracks.
Unlike other vendors that focus primarily on reimbursement opportunities, AKASA also optimizes for CMI and risk adjustment. We uncover quality indicators and review encounters for complexity and severity, ensuring accurate CMI.
Our AI isn’t a black box. It shows its work. Each recommendation comes with AI-generated justifications, direct quotes, and links to documentation, so coders can easily verify and trust the results. Transparency is at the core of our technology.
Your time matters and AKASA makes it count. Our GenAI rapidly reviews and delivers coding opportunities for staff to review, minimizing A/R delays.
Our layout is designed by coders for coders, making it easy to validate and approve recommendations quickly.
Don’t fall behindGenerative AI will have a substantial impact on the future of coding operations, according to an HFMA survey. It streamlines labor-intensive workflows, ensures more accurate coding, and enables organizations to capture appropriate revenue.
EXPLORE SURVEY RESULTS NOW
65%
of revenue cycle leaders agree that GenAI is the future of medical coding
Ready to uncover the revenue you’ve been missing out on?We’ll show you what GenAI can do for your organization. Fill out the form and we’ll be in touch.
Talk to an AKASA coding expert
"*" indicates required fields
First Name* Last Name* Company* Job Title* Work Email*
Phone*How did you hear about us? HiddenCampaign ID
You may also like
Press Release
AKASA Unveils AKASA Medical CodingTM for Enhanced Revenue Cy ...
Read More
Video
Nebraska Methodist Health System on Generative AI and Coding
Download the Video
Blog
Coding Check-Up: Is Your Medical Coding as Comprehensive as It Could Be?
Achieving accuracy in medical coding requires a comprehensive approach that thoroughly reviews all relevant clinical docume ...  Read the Blog