URL: https://akasa.com/press/akasa-named-fastest-growing-generative-ai-startups/

AKASA Named Among Fastest Growing Generative AI Startups to Watch | AKASA
Press
AKASA Named Among Fastest Growing Generative AI Startups to Watch
San Francisco, CA – November 20, 2024 – AKASA, the preeminent provider of generative AI solutions for the healthcare revenue cycle, has been recognized by AIM Research as one of the “Fastest Growing GenAI Startups to Watch in the U.S. 2024.”
AIM Research, a premier AI and data science market research firm, identified AKASA as a standout company due to its groundbreaking solutions that merge advanced AI technology with the complexities of healthcare operations.
This respected distinction highlights AKASA’s innovative use of generative AI (GenAI) to streamline revenue cycle management for healthcare providers, improving revenue yield and enhancing operational efficiency. AKASA is one of only two companies on the list that serve the healthcare industry.
“We’re honored to be recognized for our work in GenAI,” said Malinka Walaliyadde, CEO and co-founder of AKASA. “It is a testament to the dedication and innovation of our team. We’re using the best technology available to solve the most complex problems of the revenue cycle.”
About AKASA
AKASA is the preeminent provider of generative AI solutions for the healthcare revenue cycle. Our offerings are built on the AKASA Platform, which integrates the company’s proprietary generative AI technology and deep revenue cycle expertise to deliver exceptional impact for hospitals, health systems, and the patients they serve. AKASA is the only AI company whose technology is trained on a health system’s own clinical and financial data, enabling AI to better understand the specific nuances of a health system. AKASA helps healthcare organizations improve revenue outcomes, achieve greater efficiency, empower staff, and allocate resources where they matter most.
WRITTEN BY
Tiffany Smith
Tiffany Smith is the editorial director at AKASA. A former magazine editor, she has more than 25 years of experience in content, across healthcare, higher education, and finance, among others.