URL: http://akasa.com/platform/trust-security/#benefits

How AKASA Handles Data | AKASA
PLATFORM
Trust & Security
The protection of your data is our priorityWe understand your concern and caution about sharing sensitive data. As a HIPAA-compliant, HITRUST-certified, and SOC 2-certified company, we protect your data at all costs.
REQUEST DEMO
Overview
Benefits
Features
Privacy and security compliance Tools and automation requires data. There’s no getting around that. But, unlike many other vendors in the revenue cycle technology space, we don't require any on-premise installations and have multiple options to exchange data securely. Our HIPAA-compliant security infrastructure is built on a foundation of the highest industry standards, including HITRUST CSF, SOC 2, NIST-800-53, and CIS. Our dedicated IT team does the heavy lifting and takes any security concerns or risks off your plate. In the event of a flagged security concern during our 24/7 monitoring, we’ve developed a detailed Incident Response Policy to keep your data and organization safe.
Safety measures that matter
EncryptionWe employ ZeroTrust VPN and FIPS 140-2 compliant data-at-rest and data-in-transit encryption protocols and keys, which are employed with complete user lockdown and privilege controls.
BenchmarkingWe utilize CIS Level 1 hardening standards and Industry Best Practices within our AWS infrastructure. CIS benchmarks are accepted in business, industry, and government use, and require strict adherence to safety.
Access auditingAny access to PHI data is logged with detailed information. In the event of a suspected breach, we have documented security protocols we quickly put into place to keep information secure.
24/7 monitoringWe monitor our automation 24/7, with strict access monitoring metrics established. Any deviation for our automation or relating to access immediately triggers our alerts and response protocols.
In-depth defense and layered security
Many tiered security groups
Network and host-based firewalls
Network and sub-network isolation
Multi-factor authentication
A low attack surface
AKASA achieves SOC 2 type 2 certification
Everything as code
Infrastructure
Accounts and payments
Auditing and compliance
Product documentation and defenses
Streamline your operations with a platform that protects your data.
REQUEST DEMOCONTACT US