URL: https://akasa.com/prior-auth-success-kit/#successKit

Prior Auth | Success Kit | AKASA
Prior Authorization SolutionsReady to save time on prior auth?
Prior authorizations are on the rise, taking precious staff time away from improving the patient experience and driving revenue. This stops now.
Download your Prior Authorization Success Kit with advice from industry leaders. Learn how to:
Streamline prior auth
Better utilize staff
Find the right prior auth automation vendor
SHOW ME WHAT’S IN THE KIT
Claim your Prior Authorization Success Kit
"*" indicates required fields
First Name* Last Name* Work Email*
Organization Name* Job Title* HiddenCampaign ID
Your Prior Authorization Success Kit includes:
Ebook | Stop Wasting Time on Prior Authorization
Video | Authorization Management demo
Brochure | Authorization Management
The 3 Most Important Prior Authorization Processes to Automate
How Automation Can Address the Challenges of Prior Authorization
Report | Solving Today's Greatest RCM Staffing Challenges
Can your prior auth workflow be improved?
DOWNLOAD YOUR KIT
AKASA Authorization Management
Auth Determination & Initiation Determine if prior auth is required and submit a request along with additional diagnosis and procedure codes and any required medical records. Ensure prior auth requests are thorough and accurate to improve turnaround time
Auth Status Checks Obtain well-timed auth statuses via payer portals and return detailed information in your EMR to drive follow-up workflows. Ease staff burden and frustrations from tedious status checks
Inpatient Notifications Notify payers of inpatient admissions, attach medical records as required, and document the notification in your EHR. Minimize reimbursement issues with timely notice of admissions (NOA)
Our automation holistically automates prior authorizations for providers.
Get the success kit
The real cost of prior authPrior auth is on the rise, and staffing increases aren’t feasible in the current RCM landscape. Just how much time and precious resources is prior auth consuming?
12 minutes and 7 seconds: Average time for auth request and status check
35.6% of healthcare organizations say prior auth and pre-certifications are the leading cause of initial denials
40% of providers have staff working only on prior authorization
$528 million: 2019 cost of prior auth administrative task
With the resources in the Prior Authorization Success Kit, you can get the most out of the team you have and elevate your people into more engaging, revenue-generating roles.
Download your Prior Auth Success Kit
"*" indicates required fields
First Name* Last Name* Work Email*
Organization Name* Job Title* HiddenCampaign ID