URL: https://akasa.com/prior-auth-demo-video/

Prior Auth | Demo Video Gated | AKASA
Prior Authorization ProductsAuthorization Management: Your holistic prior auth solution
It takes 12 minutes and 7 seconds to handle a prior auth initiation and status check. Prior auth is consuming more time than ever before. But it doesn’t have to. Advanced AI-powered automation is the answer.
With AKASA Authorization Management, you can:
Resolve more prior authorizations
Improve turnaround time
Ease staff burden and frustration
Enable timely patient care
Fill out the form and watch a video to see how Authorization Management can help improve your workflows.
See Authorization Management in action
"*" indicates required fields
First Name* Last Name* Work Email*
Organization Name* Job Title* HiddenCampaign ID
AKASA Authorization Management
Auth Determination & Initiation Determine if prior auth is required and submit a request along with any additional diagnosis and procedure codes and required medical records. Ensure prior auth requests are thorough and accurate to improve turnaround time.
Auth Status Checks Obtain well-timed auth statuses via payer portals and return detailed information in your EHR to drive follow-up workflows. Ease staff burden and frustrations from tedious status checks.
Inpatient Notifications Notify payers of inpatient admissions, attach medical records as required, and document the notification in your EHR. Minimize reimbursement issues with timely notice of admissions (NOA).
Our automation holistically automates prior authorizations for providers.
Watch demo video to see how
Prior auth is on the riseStaffing for this increase isn’t feasible in the current RCM landscape. Do you have resources to throw away on something you can automate?
12 minutes and 7 seconds: Average time for auth request and status check
35.6% of healthcare organizations say prior auth and pre-certifications are the leading cause of initial denials
40% of providers have staff working only on prior authorization
$528 million: 2019 cost of prior auth administrative tasks
Fill out the form to see how automation can streamline your prior auth process.
Download your Prior Auth Success Kit
"*" indicates required fields
First Name* Last Name* Work Email*
Organization Name* Job Title* HiddenCampaign ID