URL: https://akasa.com/about-us/#mission

Say hello to AKASA | AKASA
Company
ABOUT AKASA
We provide generative AI solutions for the healthcare revenue cycleAdministrative inefficiencies bloat healthcare spending and drive staff burnout. This is one reason medical bills are the number one cause of bankruptcy in the United States. AKASA is here to fix that.
Mission
Origins
What We Do
Experience
Benefits
AKASA Facts
Our mission
At AKASA, we're building the future of healthcare with AI.
Solving healthcare pain points
America offers some of the best healthcare in the world. Yet, our healthcare system is challenged by high administrative costs that burden patients, providers, and payers with unnecessary expenses. The four AKASA founders came together to address those challenges.
Using top talent and technology
Our team is made up of engineering, healthcare, and revenue cycle experts who understand this industry and want to improve it. Our approach uses advanced generative AI technology to solve some of the most pressing financial pain points in the revenue cycle. That gives health systems the ability to focus on what really matters: helping patients. This is the foundation of AKASA.
What does AKASA do?
Integrate our proprietary generative AI (GenAI) technology and deep revenue cycle expertise to deliver impactful revenue cycle solutions
Provide AI assistants to empower revenue cycle teams to work better and faster
Automate complex revenue cycle workflows with the latest in GenAI technology
Help healthcare organizations improve revenue outcomes, achieve greater efficiency, empower staff, and allocate resources where they matter most
60%
of health systems are actively considering the use of GenAI in the revenue cycle
Source: AKASA survey
Our people have outstanding experience
Tech talent meets healthcare expertiseWe've brought together a unique team of the best Silicon Valley engineers and healthcare industry veterans to solve the challenges of the revenue cycle in new ways.
Come work with usEveryone is welcome.AKASA embraces a work-from-anywhere attitude. We take a mindful approach to building a culture that is flexible, diverse, and inclusive.
SEE OPEN ROLES
Unlimited paid time off (PTO)
Robust healthcare plans including 100% free options
Employer contribution to healthcare spending accounts
Mental health support through Spring Health
Free One Medical membership
Generous parental leave policy
Company-sponsored 401k plan
In-person company-wide get-togethers
What does AKASA mean?Akasa is a Sanskrit word for sky, space, or aether. In medieval science, there were four elements: earth, water, air, and fire. Akasa was the proposed “fifth element” that explained natural phenomena like light and gravity.
In healthcare, there are also four fundamental elements, known as “the four Ps”: patients, providers, payers, and pharma. AKASA is the “fifth element” that unites them and the overall financial infrastructure of our industry.
What is the AKASA logo? Our logo is an illustration of our GenAI technology. The first line of dots represents disparate data. The middle line of connected dots represents mapping and learning processes. Finally, the solid bottom line represents the full technology that brings all of the information together and serves as an important foundation for effective healthcare operations.
Step into the future of healthcare with AKASA.
VIEW OPEN JOBS