URL: https://akasa.com/solutions/coding#benefits

Medical Coding Powered by Generative AI | AKASA
SOLUTIONS
Coding
Your medical coding generative AI assistantThanks to AKASA Medical CodingTM, hospital and health system coding teams can now work with unprecedented comprehensiveness to improve CMI and revenue performance. Welcome to the next generation of medical coding technology.
schedule call
AKASA Medical Coding
Coding Optimizer
How It Works
Benefits
Client Stories
AKASA Medical Coding What if your coding team could analyze every clinical document, every time? Now, they can. AKASA Medical Coding puts the power of generative AI (GenAI) into your coders' hands, relieving them from laborious tasks and elevating them into high-performing validators. The advanced technology is trained on your data to provide comprehensive coding recommendations. Address multiple service lines simultaneously, within your most complex inpatient settings. Health systems can fully code encounters prior to coder review or identify opportunities after the coder takes the initial pass. Either way, our solution helps drive accurate coding, improve quality measures, and achieve appropriate revenue at a lower cost.
Coding Optimizer How much revenue is your health system leaving on the table? Find out with Coding Optimizer. Part of AKASA Medical Coding, it's a game-changing GenAI assistant for your medical coding team. It reviews coded inpatient encounters along with relevant clinical documentation to uncover missed revenue opportunities and quality measures others miss. Tailored specifically to a health system, Coding Optimizer learns your nuances and delivers highly accurate and actionable coding suggestions for coders to approve. It’s time to get all of the revenue you’ve earned.
Interested in Coding Optimizer?
See how it works
How AKASA Medical Coding worksHere are some of the unique AI-driven features that make our medical coding solutions innovative, transparent, and user-friendly. Step into a new era of coding, with abilities you won't find elsewhere.
Comprehensive Chart Review
Quotes and Justifications
Clinical Quality Measures & CMI
Confidence level indicators
Tailored LLM
Identifies and rapidly combs through every relevant clinical document (clinical notes, imaging notes, clinical observations, and more) for every encounter, delivering the needed information to coders and minimizing switching between systems.
Our AI isn’t a black box. The technology empowers staff to verify coding suggestions quickly and easily through AI-generated justifications and direct quotes and links to underlying charts.
Information that aids staff in understanding and coding the complexity and severity of the patient to help maximize revenue performance and case mix index (CMI). By capturing things that many other solutions don’t, we help make sure you’re not leaving opportunities on the table.
AI-generated confidence level indicators provide full transparency on the comprehensive list of recommended codes. They enable staff to accept certain codes quickly and spend the time addressing codes that may need review.
Our technology is not generic — it’s not one algorithm that every health system shares. AKASA Medical Coding is powered by a large language model (LLM) built specifically for each health system. Your LLM is trained starting from our foundational model, which includes CMS best practices, the latest coding standards, coding guidelines, coding clinics, and health system-specific historical data. We then further fine-tune it on your clinical and financial data to learn your specific nuances. This means your coding is more accurate and comprehensive.
Why AKASA Medical Coding
ComprehensiveCapture the patient encounter more holistically with GenAI that sifts through more clinical documents and details than people can.
EfficientMaximize coder productivity, leading to reduced DNFC, happier staff, speedier submissions, and less reliance on contract workers and outsourcing.
TransparentImplement advanced technology you can actually see and understand, with AI-generated justifications and easily verifiable direct quotes.
AccurateImprove CMI, denials, and revenue performance with coding recommendations that track and flag the right codes across the patient record.
What coding leaders are saying
Explore other AKASA solutions
discover the benefits
Authorization ManagementEnhance prior authorization by empowering your patient access team with a GenAI assistant or offloading tasks to our automation. Either way, we help you get it done.
discover the benefits
Claim AttachmentSimplify solicited doc submission to payers with automation powered by GenAI — helping resolve them more efficiently, reduce payment delays, and lower denials.
Discover the benefits
Claim StatusAutomatically obtain up-to-date status information for claims, alleviating the burden on your staff, speeding up claim resolution, and preventing reimbursement delays.
The AKASA PlatformSuperpowers for your revenue cycleOur platform integrates advanced generative AI with our deep revenue cycle expertise. By training our models on clinical and financial data, we’re bringing you accuracy, speed, and completeness. And driving more revenue for your organization.
GET SUPERPOWERS
What codes, quality measures, and revenue opportunities are you missing out on?
schedule callBrowse Resources