URL: http://akasa.com/solutions/claim-status#benefits

AI-powered claim status automation | AKASA
SOLUTIONS
Claim Status
Claim status automation speeds up claim resolutionAI-powered claim status automation tells your revenue cycle team what to touch and when, resolving claims faster, reducing timely filing limits, and improving efficiency.
Let's chatDownload Case Study
Solution
How It Works
Benefits
Client Stories
Automatically obtain up-to-date status information
Claim Status AutomationIs your team wasting valuable time statusing each claim? Or not checking them at all? AI-powered Claim Status Automation from AKASA can improve these processes. Our automation does the work for you, proactively checking the status of claims to prioritize follow-up efforts and help you get ahead of problematic accounts. The results? Reduced staff burden and A/R days.
We removed 71% of accounts from staff queues
see how
How Claim Status Automation worksOur AI simultaneously works on a batch of accounts at a time and cascades through various search options to find a matching claim. Status check results are interpreted by our machine learning or RCM experts and returned to your EHR. Accounts requiring intervention are routed to different work queues for your staff or AKASA to prioritize follow-up.
CHECKS STATUS
INTERPRETS RESULTS
DRIVES ACTIONS
The technology determines the right time and frequency to check claim status for each payer. It simultaneously works on a batch of accounts at a time, quickly clearing your backlog. The AI continuously adapts to changing payer portals, so status checks get done — even when there are updates. It cascades through various search options to find a matching claim with a payer, ensuring high accuracy.
The AI obtains robust datasets, such as service line-level and payment information detail, to guide follow-up workflows. Advanced machine learning then accurately understands payer portal responses. We leverage our RCM experts to QA a subset of the claims, ensuring your results are interpreted correctly.
Our solution documents the status of the claim, defers it, or applies action codes based on the status. When it finds a status of no claim on file, we provide more data on why that is to help revenue cycle teams triage those claims. Our automation routes time-sensitive accounts (i.e. pending, denied, and no claim on file) to your staff or other AKASA work queues for quick follow-up. This helps your staff focus on problematic accounts, eliminating unnecessary touches.
Why AKASA Claim Status Automation
Speed up claim resolutionProactively check on the status of claims to guide follow-up efforts on time-sensitive accounts.
Improve cash flowQuickly respond to problematic accounts to reduce A/R days and improve speed of claim resolution.
Free staff from manual tasksStrategically focus your team on more complex workflows. It will improve job satisfaction — and overall metrics.
Get timely information with AKASA Claim Status Automation
Get Started Today
$30Mgross yield increase
86%efficiency improvement
We are just getting more pennies on the dollar, because of the opportunities for our employees to work those more difficult accounts. I hadn't really thought that that was going to be a benefit. I could easily do, 'We're running these many claim statuses, so that we can eliminate this many hours of work from people.' But seeing that go to that yield was great to see and definitely brings a smile to my face.
Jeff FrancisVice President and CFO at Methodist Health System
See results
Explore other AKASA solutions
discover the benefits
Authorization ManagementEnhance prior authorization by empowering your patient access team with a GenAI assistant or offloading tasks to our automation. Either way, we help you get it done.
discover the benefits
Medical CodingAchieve unprecedented coding comprehensiveness, transparency, accuracy, and efficiency with GenAI-powered coding recommendations trained on your clinical and financial data.
discover the benefits
Claim AttachmentSimplify solicited doc submission to payers with automation powered by GenAI — helping resolve them more efficiently, reduce payment delays, and lower denials.
The AKASA PlatformSuperpowers for your revenue cycleOur platform integrates advanced generative AI with our deep revenue cycle expertise. By training our models on clinical and financial data, we’re bringing you accuracy, speed, and completeness. And driving more revenue for your organization.
get superpowers
You may also like
Resources
Oct 11, 2023 10 Ways To Accelerate Your Claims
READ MORE
Blog
Dec 17, 2023 Why Start Revenue Cycle Automation With Claim Status
When I talk about revenue cycle automation with any healthcare leader, it’s not uncommon for their eyes to light...
READ MORE
Resources
Nov 15, 2023 Webinar: 10 Ways To Accelerate Your Claims
READ MORE
Want to improve cash flow? AKASA can help.
Schedule callBrowse Resources