URL: http://akasa.com/solutions/claim-attachments#solution

Claim attachment RCM solution powered by generative AI | AKASA
SOLUTIONS
Claim Attachment
Claim attachments made simple and accurateRespond to payer documentation requests with automation powered by generative AI. And reduce denials in the process.
Schedule Call
Solution
How it Works
Benefits
A better way to resolve payer documentation requests
Claim Attachment AutomationWe'll select relevant solicited documentation, match them to claims leveraging our advanced AI technology and RCM experts, and submit them through payer portals for you. Your staff won’t need to manually review documentation. AKASA does the work for you.
Start transforming your claim attachment process today
Let's get started
How Claim Attachment Automation worksOur automation identifies, retrieves, and uploads supporting documentation as required by payers for claim adjudication, and then posts the proof of submission in your EHR.
IDENTIFY REQUIREMENTS
MATCH DOCUMENTATION
SUBMIT ATTACHMENTS
Our AI proactively identifies requests for additional documentation via claim status responses and remittance advices. It works accounts daily to prevent growing queues and enable faster response to payer documentation requests.
We use generative AI to select the correct supplemental documentation and match it to payer requests. Our processes support both the Epic ROI and Cerner Report Request modules. If required attachments aren’t available, it routes claims to relevant work queues for your staff to review.
We then submit solicited attachments, such as medical records and itemized bills, electronically via payer portals. After that submission, we add a note in the client's EHR with the confirmation number, documents uploaded, and other relevant information, so they know exactly what was done. We also progress the account through the workflow in the EHR, such as adding "complete" to the item in the queue.
Why Claim Attachment Automation
Resolve payer requestsPromptly respond to payer documentation requests by using our technology and RCM experts to select relevant supplemental materials and match it to claims.
Reduce payment delaysWork accounts daily to prevent growing queues and enable faster response to payer documentation requests compared to staff following a manual process or using a SaaS-based tool.
Lower denials ratePrevent the possibility of a denial due to lack of documentation by ensuring responses to payer requests contain relevant documentation and are uploaded to payer portals.
Ready to speed up claim attachment resolution?
Let's connect
Explore other AKASA solutions
Discover the benefits
Authorization ManagementSolve the greatest pain points in prior auth with an AI assistant for your patient access team. All thanks to leading-edge generative AI and our deep revenue cycle expertise.
Discover the benefits
Medical CodingAchieve unprecedented coding comprehensiveness, transparency, accuracy, and efficiency with GenAI-powered coding recommendations trained on your clinical and financial data.
Discover the benefits
Claim StatusAutomatically obtain up-to-date status information for claims, alleviating the burden on your staff, speeding up claim resolution, and preventing reimbursement delays.
The AKASA PlatformSuperpowers for your revenue cycle Our platform integrates advanced generative AI with our deep revenue cycle expertise. By training our models on clinical and financial data, we’re bringing you accuracy, speed, and completeness. And driving more revenue for your organization.
get superpowers
You may also like
Blog
Oct 30, 2023 9 Ways To Work Medical Billing Denials More Effectively
Denials aren’t getting any better. Claims are getting more complicated. Volumes are fluctuating. Payer rules are changing. We’ve tried...
READ MORE
Resources
Dec 22, 2022 Infographic: The Growing Burden of Prior Auth
READ MORE
Press
Apr 19, 2023 Denials Management Is the Most Time-Consuming Revenue Cycle Task, Followed by Prior Authorization, According to Healthcare Financial Leaders
South San Francisco, Calif. — April 19, 2023 — AKASA, the leading developer of AI for healthcare operations, released...
READ MORE
See revenue faster with AKASA
Speak to a revenue cycle expert Today