URL: https://akasa.com/careers/#life

Current job openings at AKASA | AKASA
CAREERS
Help build the future of healthcare with AIThe healthcare revenue cycle is complex. AKASA is here to fix that. But we need you.
VIEW OPEN ROLESENGINEERING CAREERS
Overview
Values
Life
Benefits
Team
Want to make healthcare accessible and affordable? Join us
We started AKASA to deliver world-class technology that improves the complex healthcare administrative landscape. Making operations more efficient for both providers and the patients they serve. And we’re doing just that.
Our employees rate AKASA highly
91%
say it's a great place to work
95%
say they can take time off when they think it's necessary
94%
say they're given a lot of responsibility
Our values
AKASA core beliefs and behaviors We weave these values into the fabric of everything we do. They help us achieve our vision and uphold our mission of transforming healthcare operations.
Empower Health Systems We are relentlessly focused on enabling health systems to transform their operations.
Innovate for Impact Our mission is audacious. We only succeed by finding the best solution and focusing on what matters.
Win or Learn, Quickly To truly transform healthcare, we must act quickly and constantly evolve.
In This Together We know great work isn’t done alone. Nothing is someone else’s problem.
Life at AKASA
Remote-friendly We embrace a work-from-anywhere attitude At AKASA, our mission is to build the future of healthcare with AI. To help us achieve that goal, we aim to attract the best talent, no matter your location within the U.S. We are a remote-friendly, hybrid organization with team members in 28 states. We have hubs of AKASAns in the Bay Area, NYC, and Denver to name a few, and support co-working days within these areas.
SEE OPEN ROLES
Supporting employeesOur benefits and perks package were designed to support our team at home, in the office, and everywhere in between. This includes:
Unlimited paid time off (PTO)
Robust healthcare plans, including 100% free options
Employer contribution to healthcare spending accounts
Mental health support through Spring Health
Free One Medical membership
Generous parental leave policy
Company-sponsored 401k plan
In-person company-wide get-togethers
AKASA welcomes everyoneWe know that diverse teams succeed.We have built a community and culture in which all AKASAns, regardless of background or identity, can bring their authentic selves to work. We believe this culture of belonging is critical in order for our team members to do the best work of their lives.
If you're from a non-traditional background or underrepresented group, please apply to one of our open roles. Not sure if you're 100% qualified? Apply anyway. Your skills may be exactly what we need.
Our investors
Andreessen Horowitz is a Silicon Valley-based venture capital firm with over $10B in assets under management.
BOND is a global technology investment firm that supports visionary founders throughout their entire life cycle of innovation and growth.
Costanoa Ventures is a Silicon Valley-based venture capital firm which invests in enterprise-focused seed and Series A technology companies.
Hear it from our team
AKASA cares about its employees. Yes, there are great benefits and compensation packages, but most importantly I feel valued and my opinion is valued. My favorite thing is getting to work with incredibly smart people. From our engineers to our revenue cycle team, everyone is very collaborative and supportive. They all want things to be better for revenue cycle teams and patients. Plus, there’s such a wide variety of backgrounds, with people coming from technology, healthcare systems, insurance companies, etc. I get to work with these amazing people to help build better tools for the healthcare industry. We’re all dedicated to growing and expanding our products and technology, creating the best of what’s available in the industry.
Mindy Harris
—
Director of Coding
Join AKASA. Expand what's possible.
VIEW OPEN ROLES