URL: https://akasa.com

Generative AI for Healthcare and Revenue Cycle | AKASA
Transforming your revenue cycle with generative AI Reducing denials. Improving margins. Increasing revenue. Advanced generative AI (GenAI) trained on clinical and financial data can help make it a reality. Give your health system revenue cycle staff the superpowers they desperately need.
Let's chat
A revenue cycle that is faster, smarter, and better AKASA is leveraging our deep RCM expertise and the best technology available to improve the revenue cycle. We’re using GenAI, trained on clinical and financial data, to power our platform and solutions. The results? Faster speed-to-value, decreased cost-to-collect, empowered teams, and greater patient satisfaction.
AKASA is the preeminent provider of generative AI solutions for the healthcare revenue cycle
Authorization
Solve the greatest pain points in prior auth with a GenAI assistant for your patient access team.
Explore
Medical Coding
Achieve unprecedented coding comprehensiveness and accuracy with GenAI coding recommendations.
Explore
Claim Status
Obtain up-to-date status information for claims automatically, alleviating the burden on your staff.
Explore
Claim Attachment
Simplify solicited documentation submission to payers with automation powered by GenAI.
Explore
GenAI for RCMChatGPT is everywhere. Have you ever thought about how you could use it for the revenue cycle? At AKASA, we have.
We’ve improved the generative AI that powers ChatGPT by optimizing it for healthcare and putting it directly into staff workflows. Our AI knows revenue cycle, grasps the nuances of your health system, understands clinical context, and helps you do more.
how our platform works
70%
of healthcare organizations are actively considering the use of GenAI (with 60% eyeing it for rev cycle)
AKASA survey
~40% better than GPT-4 The AKASA Platform dramatically outperforms popular generative AI models in understanding patient records, making better revenue cycle suggestions, and thus improving staff efficiency. Why? Instead of using a generic model (like OpenAI's), we’re training it on health systems' clinical and financial data.
AKASA by the numbers
Our client base represents 475+ hospitals and 6,500+ outpatient facilities, across all 50 states.
$90B
total client net patient revenue
43M
clinical docs our GenAI is trained on (and counting)
2.5x
increase in transaction volume in the last year
Create efficiency with AKASA
Start now
13%decrease in A/R days
300+hours of staff time saved per month
Unlike other companies we considered, AKASA takes a holistic view. They plan for not only how to automate the revenue cycle, but how to continue to optimize it into the future. We knew we could grow with them.
Matt MorganCFO at Montage Health
READ CASE STUDY
$30Mgross yield increase
86%efficiency improvement
We have been impressed with the AKASA team’s expertise in revenue cycle operations. We continue to see an improvement in our major metric, which is cost-to-collect. We are just getting more pennies on the dollar.
Jeff FrancisVice President and CFO at Methodist Health System
READ CASE STUDY
4 monthsto build and deploy
AKASA stands out so much from other solutions that I’ve seen. We’re trying to get AKASA pushed further into our organization because they do so much more in terms of automation. We’ve had a really great experience and anyone that sees what this technology can do for us has been very impressed.
Melissa HustonDirector of Solutions Support at MediRevv
READ CASE STUDY
You may also like
Press Release
AKASA Named Among Fastest Growing Generative AI Startups to Watch
Read More
Blog
Why Medical Coding Needs Generative AI
Read the Blog
Guide
10 Things Healthcare Leaders Need to Know About LLMs and GenAI
Download the Guide
Improve patient experience and maximize revenue — with AKASA
Let's talkread case study